Docker Images
	We will see how to create your own image, but before that let us look at why you would need to create your own image
	
Why am I containerizing?
	Reasons for creating your own image:
		1.) You cannot find a service, on docker hub, that you want to use as part of your application
		2.) You decided that the application that you're developing will be dockerized for ease of shipping and deployment

How to create my own image
	Lets look at an example where we containerize an application, a simple web app that was built using the Python Flask framework
	Steps for containerizing an app:
		1.) Understand what you are containerizing or what app we are creating an image for and how the app is built
		2.) Start by thinking what you might do if you want to deploy the app manually
		3.) Write down the steps, in the right order, if you were to set it up manually
		4.) Manual set up steps:
			a.) Start with an OS, in this case, Ubuntu (Starting with an OS might not always apply as we've seen with our hands on demo in Revature which set up openjdk8)
			b.) Update the source repositories
			c.) Install dependencies (apt-get update && apt-get -y install python)
			d.) Install python dependencies (pip install flask flask-mysql)
			e.) Copy over source code of the app to another location
			f.) Run the web server
		5.) Now that you have the instructions create a Dockerfile using these instructions
				Your Dockerfile would look like this:
					FROM Ubuntu
					RUN apt-get update && apt-get -y install python
					RUN pip install flask flask-mysql
					COPY . /opt/source-code
					ENTRYPOINT FLASK_APP=/opt/source-code/app.py flask run
				a.) First create a Dockerfile named Dockerfile and write down the instructions for setting up your app in it
				b.) This includes:
						Installing dependencies
						Where to copy the source code from and to
						What the entrypoint of the application is
		6.) Build your image using the docker build command and specify the Dockerfile as input as well as a tag name for the image
				docker build . -f Dockerfile -t zohair89/my-custom-web-app
				This will create an image locally on your machine
		7.) Run the docker push command to make it available on the public Docker Hub Registry
				docker push zohair89/my-custom-web-app

Dockerfile
	Used to build a Docker image
	Text file written in a specific format that docker can understand
	It's written in an 'INSTRUCTION' 'argument' format
		In our example the 'INSTRUCTION' consists of:
			FROM,RUN,COPY,and ENTRYPOINT
		The 'argument' consists of everything to the right of the 'INSTRUCTION'
		
	Explanation of 'INSTRUCTION':
		FROM
			Defines what the base OS or another image should be for this container
			Every Docker image must be based off another image, either an OS or another image that was created before based on an OS
			All Dockerfile's must start with a FROM instruction
		RUN
			Instructs Docker to run a particular command on the base images
		COPY
			Copies files from the local system onto the Docker image
			The . represents the current directory, so whatever files/folders are located in the current directory will be copied over to the specified location inside the Docker image(in this case /opt/source-code)
		ENTRYPOINT
			Allows us to specify a command that will be run when the image is run as a container

Layered Architecture
	When Docker builds an image it builds these in a layered architecture
	Each line of instruction creates a new layer in the Docker image with just the changes from the previous layer